(Linux Kernel Development chapter 7)
Interrupts enable hardware to signal to the processor. For example, as you type, the key board controller (the hardware device that manages the keyboard) issues an electrical signal to the processor to alert the operating system to newly available key presses. These electrical signals are interrupts.The processor receives the interrupt and signals the operating system to enable the operating system to respond to the new data.

The function the kernel runs in response to a specific interrupt is called an interrupt handler or interrupt service routine (**ISR**). Each device that generates interrupts has an associated interrupt handler. For example, one function handles interrupts from the system timer, whereas another function handles interrupts generated by the keyboard. The interrupt handler for a device is part of the device’s driver (the kernel code that manages the device).

These two goals, that an interrupt handler execute quickly and perform a large amount of work, clearly conflict with one another. Because of these competing goals, the processing of interrupts is split into two parts, or halves.The interrupt handler is the top half. The top half is run immediately upon receipt of the interrupt and performs only the work that is time-critical, such as acknowledging receipt of the interrupt or resetting the hardware. Work that can be performed later is deferred until the bottom half. The [[Bottom Half]] runs in the future, at a more convenient time, with all interrupts enabled.
